---
title: AI and the New Era of Science
date: 2025-09-13
authors: [chris]       # must match the key in .authors.yml
categories: [AI]
tags: [AI, Science]
description: Role of AI in the new era of science
image: assets/IMG_20230424_101636.jpg
comments: true
---

Artificial Intelligence is advancing faster than any of us could have imagined. Every week, new tools and applications emerge, reshaping the way we think, work, and create. For today’s PhD students and researchers, this is a rare moment in history — a chance to accelerate projects, eliminate repetitive tasks, and devote more energy to the questions that truly matter.

That’s why I’ve embraced AI in my own PhD work. It’s not just about enhancing the science itself, but about organising my workflow more effectively, communicating ideas with greater clarity, and sharing them more widely. AI is not here to replace scientists; it’s here to sharpen our tools so we can focus on what matters most: discovery. My goal is to learn how to use it both efficiently and responsibly, turning it into a genuine partner in research rather than a novelty.

Of course, this new power comes with challenges. Ethical considerations, from fairness and bias to environmental impact,  are real and pressing. But awareness of these issues doesn’t mean slowing down; it means applying AI where it truly matters, and doing so with care. In the past, I used AI inefficiently simply because I didn’t fully understand its capabilities. Now, with more experience, I not only work faster but also reduce my environmental footprint. The only way to have zero impact would be to avoid AI entirely, but in a few years, avoiding it will be almost impossible. The real task is to use it wisely.

The next generation of PhD students will work in ways that look nothing like today. They will grow up with AI as a natural extension of their scientific process, asking questions we can’t yet imagine. It’s an exciting era, and I feel fortunate to witness how far we may push the boundaries of knowledge. Part of my own learning is finding ways to connect with this new generation and collaborate with their brilliance.
